### QED ###
QED is a text editor written circa 1967 by L. Peter Deutsch and Butler W. Lampson at Berkley for the [SDS-930 computer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SDS_930). It was the inspiration for the unix text editor [ed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ed_(text_editor)). 

This is a c implementation I made for fun, and isn't completely finished yet. I did not have access to any source code for the original in making this, and it is based primarily on the [1968 DARPA manual](http://bitsavers.trailing-edge.com/pdf/sds/9xx/940/ucbProjectGenie/mcjones/R-15_QED.pdf) by Angluin and Deutsch, with gaps filled in by (in roughly descending order) the 1967 Communications of the ACM article "[An Online Editor](https://doi.org/10.1145%2F363848.363863)" by Deutsch and Lampson, the behavior of ed, and my own common sense. The goal is to reproduce the user-visible behavior of QED rather than its internal workings, even when there are sources that discuss that topic.

To get into the spirit of things, I wrote it entirely using ed and, as it matured, qed itself (with less sometimes used to look at the code).

#### Compiling and Running

It requires no external libraries apart from ones that come with c. You can compile it with:

	cc qed.c -o qed

and install it with:

	sudo mv qed /usr/local/bin/

It does assume you have a Unicode-compatible terminal to render the up-arrow and left-arrow glyphs shown in the manual. I've tried to reproduce the experience of using QED as closely as I can in a modern unix environment, but a few changes from the original have been necessary:
* From the manual it appears that the machine this originally ran on was upper-case only. This version has no limitation about editing upper- and lower-case text.
* The manual also suggests that the environment the original QED ran on had a @CONTINUE feature that seems to have allowed the user to "un-quit" the last program that was running, I assume as long as nothing else had been run in the interim that might have overwritten the first program's memory. The original relied on this in place of any kind of "there are unsaved changes, are you sure you want to quit?" warning; instead it just let you know there were unsaved changes with WRITE OUT! and then quit anyway, since you could just @CONTINUE QED if you did actually want to save. Since unix doesn't have anything like @CONTINUE, I have implemented the following behavior: when QED quits, it saves the program state to /tmp/qed-dump. When launched with the -c flag, QED restores its state from this file, a near-equivalent to @CONTINUE QED from the original
	* Notes: this feature is only intended to allow immediate resumption of QED after quitting, as @CONTINUE QED would have done. The save file is overwritten whenever another QED instance quits and it will be removed on restart by most OS's. It is not meant to be compatible accross machine architectures and the format is versioned so there is a chance that updating QED between launches will cause QED to refuse to read the previous version's save file because the format has changed (though this won't happen for most updates). The file is written on any non-crash exit, regardless of whether WRITE OUT! was typed by the program

Apart from these, I have not implemented any features not found in the manual or the article.

#### To do
Here's a rough list of things that I haven't finished implementing yet:
* The TABS command that sets the tab stops. Currently it just inserts ^I tabs when the user presses the tab key. The original appears to have only supported indentation via spaces; if you wanted an actual tab you'd have to do ^V+tab
* The ^K editing key mostly works but can't yet be used to join lines
* ^Q is supposed to be able to delete multiple lines if you keep pressing it; currently it will only clear the current line
* Buffer calls are not supposed to echo the buffer contents to the terminal, but they currently do
* Negative addresses are supposed to be converted to 1; currently they are rejected
* QED is supposed to recognize all editing control characters when performing APPEND, INSERT, or CHANGE, but treat the line being edited as blank. Currently it ignores any control characters that reference the line being edited when in these modes
* The ignore-characters mode engaged by typing a double-quote
#### Other QED Sources and Projects
I started this project in 2015, forgot about it for a few years, then picked it up again in early 2019. In the interim some original sources for different versions of QED were published online, collected in the [QED archive](https://github.com/arnoldrobbins/qed-archive). These include assembly for the version I've been attempting to reproduce here. Once I've gotten this project to a point where it is (I think) feature complete, I might take a look (if I can find a reference on SDS-930 assembly), but as it stands this project is not based on that code. There is also a modern port of QED [by Leah Neukirchen](https://github.com/chneukirchen/qed-caltech), but from the name and documentation it is of a later QED editor than the one I'm targetting here.
#### Ambiguities in the Manual
* It isn't clear what if any control characters are recognized when typing in filenames for WRITE ON and READ FROM. I will assume they accept the same ones as SUBSTITUTE
* For the WRITE ON and READ FROM commands, the manual shows on page 4-1 examples of the form "READ FROM /TEST/.". Are the slashes here part of the file name? Or are they delilmiters like the slashes in SUBSTITUTE? I have chosen to interpret this in the latter way, but this may well be incorrect; the ACM article has examples "READ FROM PROG1." which suggests no user-specified delimiter and that filename entry is terminated with a "." character. Perhaps the file system did not accept "." as a valid part of a file name; obviously this would be a significant problem on unix where it is common character in filenames. For that reason I'm going with the delimiter interpretation which is more useable even if the evidence isn't really on its side
* The Ctrl-Q key is supposed to be able to delete multiple lines. Does this include lines above those entered by the current command? I will assume no for now as that's easier to implement and less likely to result in unintended deletions
* The count of "words" that were read/written is described with language suggesting that a word is "approximately" three characters. What is meant by this? Wikipedia says that the machine used 24-bit words and various signs point to it using an early form of ASCII as the character encoding, which would be 7 bits per character, so 24 bits could fit 3 of them. I'm assuming then that "approximately" just means rounded up if the number of characters isn't divisible by 3, rather than indicating a more dense packing that would have characters not aligned with word boundaries
* The manual says that after the PRINT command asks "DOUBLE?", the user should type Y or N which will be completed to YES or NO. It would make sense if this completion only happened in VERBOSE mode, but the manual doesn't say. I have therefore had qed complete the YES or NO regardless as that matches the manual as written.
* The manual says that the ^B (buffer call) and ^I (tab) control sequences are accepted at *any time*. For buffer call this makes sense, but what about tab? Surely it doesn't accept tabs in the middle of a command? I will assume no. Less clear is whether tabs are accepted when entering search/replace terms for SUBSTITUTE and in file names for READ FROM and WRITE ON. In the case of SUBSTITUTE, are the tabs expanded to spaces before the search is performed? That seems easier to implement so I will assume that, even if it is less useful. I see no reason why READ FROM and WRITE ON would need to accept tabs, but I will likely have them do so, with the standard expand-to-spaces meaning (relative to the filename, not the screen), because the manual doesn't say otherwise
* Speaking of tabs, did QED actually expand tabs to spaces in the buffer when typed, as I have assumed, or did it put ^I tabs into the buffer and just display them using spaces? The "any time" language could suggest that QED would simply space the cursor to the column of the next tabstop on the page whenever it encountered a tab character so that might be consistent with a tabs-for-indentation theory, but other, stronger signs point to spaces. QED had a limited number of tabstops, 4 by default but the user could enter up to 12, and it would ring the bell when trying to tab past the last one. This makes little sense if printing from the main buffer and interpreting the tabs there by spacing over; any text file with too many tabs would be ringing the bell like crazy. More precise evidence comes from the READ FROM and WRITE ON section on page 4-1. The example given has a segment of text with three lines which include one apparent tab that has been expanded to 6 spaces on the page. When this text is read or written, QED reports it is "9 WORDS" long. If we assume (1) 7-bit ASCII as the character encoding, (2) single-character newlines (probably CR), (3) a terminating newline on the last line, and (4) that characters are stored three to a word without a more dense bit-packing, then using spaces would make that segment 25 characters long while using tabs would be 20. In the former case it would take 9 words, while in the latter it would take only 7, supporting that spaces were used. Even if we assume CRLF newlines, the tabs version only gets to 8 words.
#### Observations
* Some of the old terminology in the manual is interesting. Evidently one wrote "on" or "onto" a file rather than "to" a file
* The use of Ctrl-I for tab and Ctrl-M for carriage return, along with the lack of lower-case, suggests ASCII but an early version of it. The use of (CR) and ^M makes me think that text files used CR for newlines rather than LF or CRLF; the word counts given in the manual for WRITE ON and READ FROM are at least consistent with single-character newlines
* When editing program text with qed, the feature I miss most from ed is backward search. QED accepted a syntax of subtracting a search from a line, e.g. 4-[foobar], and it would make total sense if this did a backward search where 4+[foobar] did a forward search, but the manual is fairly unambiguous that they do the same thing, a forward search. The ACM article says that QED stored the main buffer as a single monolithic string with just CR characters to separate the lines, so maybe a backward search was deemed too complicated or slow given this.
